Draft Prometheus plugin (#1128)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_kong_plugins/prometheus/index.md

content_type: plugin

publisher: kong-inc

> description: 'Expose metrics related to {{site.base_gateway}} and proxied upstream Services in Prometheus exposition format'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: 'Expose metrics related to {{site.base_gateway}} and proxied upstream services in Prometheus exposition format'
```
This is referring to the other services, ie external ones

  - analytics-monitoring
---

Expose metrics related to {{site.base_gateway}} and proxied upstream services in 
[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/) 
exposition format, which can be scraped by a Prometheus Server.

Metrics tracked by this plugin are available on both the [Admin API](/api/gateway/admin-ee/#/) and [Status API](/api/gateway/status/v1/#/paths/metrics/get) at the `/metrics`
endpoint. The URL to those APIs will be specific to your
installation. See [Accessing the metrics](#accessing-the-metrics) for more information.

This plugin records and exposes metrics at the node level. Your Prometheus
server will need to discover all {{site.base_gateway}} nodes via a Service discovery mechanism,
and consume data from each node's configured `/metrics` endpoint.

> ## Grafana dashboard
> 
> Metrics exported by the plugin can be graphed in Grafana using a drop-in
> dashboard: [https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/7424-kong-official/](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/7424-kong-official/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{:.success}
> **Grafana dashboard**: Metrics exported by the plugin can be graphed in Grafana using a drop-in
dashboard: [https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/7424-kong-official/](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/7424-kong-official/).
```
How about something like this? Having a one-sentence heading feels off somehow.

## Available metrics

You can expose the following metrics:

- **DB reachability**: A gauge type with a value of 0 or 1, which represents

>   whether DB can be reached by a {{site.base_gateway}} node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  whether the database can be reached by a {{site.base_gateway}} node.
```

- **Connections**: Various Nginx connection metrics like active, reading,
  writing, and number of accepted connections.

> - **Dataplane Status**: The last seen timestamp, config hash, config sync status and certificate expiration timestamp for
> data plane nodes is exported to control plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Dataplane Status**: The last seen timestamp, config hash, config sync status, and certificate expiration timestamp for
Data Plane nodes are exported to the Control Plane.
```

- **Enterprise License Information**: The {{site.base_gateway}} license expiration date, features and

> license signature. Those metrics are only exported on {{site.base_gateway}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
license signature. Those metrics are only exported on self-managed {{site.base_gateway}}.
```
Ie, not Konnect.

- **DB Entity Count**: A gauge metric that
    measures the current number of database entities.
- **Number of Nginx timers** : A gauge metric that measures the total number of Nginx
    timers in a Running or Pending state.
- **[AI LLM metrics](#ai-llm-metrics)** {% new_in 3.8 %}: AI LLM metrics are available per provider, model, cache, database name (if cached), embeddings provider (if cached), embeddings model (if cached), and Workspace.

> ### Metrics disabled by default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Optional metrics
```
I'd rename this, since the description mentions them being disabled by default. Calling them optional feels more actionable to me as well.

The following metrics are disabled by default as it may create high cardinality of metrics and may
cause performance issues.

#### Status code metrics

> When [`config.status_code_metrics`](/plugins/prometheus/reference/#schema--config-status-code-metrics) is set to true `http_requests_total`, `stream_sessions_total` metrics will be exported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When [`config.status_code_metrics`](/plugins/prometheus/reference/#schema--config-status-code-metrics) is set to true:
```
Removing to match the following sections.

- **Status codes**: HTTP status codes returned by {{site.base_gateway}}.
  - **`http_requests_total`**: HTTP status codes per Consumer/Service/Route at {{site.base_gateway}}.
  - **`stream_session_total`**: Stream status codes per Service/Route in {{site.base_gateway}}.

#### Latency metrics
When [`config.latency_metrics`](/plugins/prometheus/reference/#schema--config-latency-metrics) is set to true:
- **Latencies Histograms**: Latency (in ms), as measured at {{site.base_gateway}}:
   - **Request**: Total time taken by {{site.base_gateway}} and upstream services to serve
     requests.
   - **{{site.base_gateway}}**: Time taken for {{site.base_gateway}} to route a request and run all configured
     plugins.
   - **Upstream**: Time taken by the upstream service to respond to requests.

#### Bandwidth metrics
When [`config.bandwidth_metrics`](/plugins/prometheus/reference/#schema--config-bandwidth-metrics) is set to true:
- **Bandwidth**: Total Bandwidth (egress/ingress) flowing through {{site.base_gateway}}.
  This metric is available per Service and as a sum across all Services.

#### Upstream health metrics

> When [`config.upstream_health_metrics`}(/plugins/prometheus/reference/#schema--config-upstream-health-metrics) is set to true:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When [`config.upstream_health_metrics`]/plugins/prometheus/reference/#schema--config-upstream-health-metrics) is set to true:
```

> - **Target Health**: The healthiness status (`healthchecks_off`, `healthy`, `unhealthy`, or `dns_error`) of targets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Target Health**: The healthiness status (`healthchecks_off`, `healthy`, `unhealthy`, or `dns_error`) of Targets
```

>   belonging to a given upstream as well as their subsystem (`http` or `stream`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  belonging to a given Upstream as well as their subsystem (`http` or `stream`).
```
Both of these are referring to entities.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

{:.info}
> **Note:** Upstream targets' health information is exported once per subsystem. If both
stream and HTTP listeners are enabled, targets' health will appear twice. Health metrics
have a `subsystem` label to indicate which subsystem the metric refers to.

```

When [`config.ai_metrics`](/plugins/prometheus/reference/#schema--config-ai-metrics) is set to true:
- **AI Requests**: AI request sent to LLM providers.
- **AI Cost**: AI Cost charged by LLM providers.
- **AI Tokens**: AI Tokens counted by LLM providers.
  These are also available per token type in addition to the options listed previously.
- **AI LLM Latency**: Time taken to return a response by LLM providers.
- **AI Cache Fetch Latency**: Time taken to return a response from the cache.
- **AI Cache Embeddings Latency**: Time taken to generate embedding during the cache.

For more details, see [AI Metrics](/ai-gateway/monitor-ai-llm-metrics/).

## Accessing the metrics

In most configurations, the {{site.base_gateway}} Admin API will be behind a firewall or would
need to be set up to require authentication. Here are a couple of options to
allow access to the `/metrics` endpoint to Prometheus:

1. If the [Status API](/gateway/configuration/#status-listen)
   is enabled, then its `/metrics` endpoint can be used.
   This is the preferred method.

1. The `/metrics` endpoint is also available on the [Admin API](/api/gateway/admin-ee/#/), which can be used

>    if the Status API is not enabled. Note that this endpoint is unavailable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   if the Status API is not enabled. This endpoint is unavailable
```

   when [RBAC](/gateway/entities/rbac/) is enabled on the

>    Admin API (Prometheus does not support Key-Auth to pass the token).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Admin API, as Prometheus doesn't support key authentication to pass the token.
```

# HELP kong_data_plane_version_compatible Version compatible status of the data plane, 0 is incompatible
# TYPE kong_data_plane_version_compatible gauge
kong_data_plane_version_compatible{node_id="d4e7584e-b2f2-415b-bb68-3b0936f1fde3",hostname="ubuntu-bionic",ip="127.0.0.1",kong_version="2.4.1"} 1
# HELP kong_nginx_metric_errors_total Number of nginx-lua-prometheus errors
# TYPE kong_nginx_metric_errors_total counter
kong_nginx_metric_errors_total 0
# HELP kong_upstream_target_health Health status of targets of upstream. States = healthchecks_off|healthy|unhealthy|dns_error, value is 1 when state is populated.
kong_upstream_target_health{upstream="UPSTREAM_NAME",target="TARGET",address="IP:PORT",state="healthchecks_off",subsystem="http"} 0
kong_upstream_target_health{upstream="UPSTREAM_NAME",target="TARGET",address="IP:PORT",state="healthy",subsystem="http"} 1
kong_upstream_target_health{upstream="UPSTREAM_NAME",target="TARGET",address="IP:PORT",state="unhealthy",subsystem="http"} 0
kong_upstream_target_health{upstream="UPSTREAM_NAME",target="TARGET",address="IP:PORT",state="dns_error",subsystem="http"} 0
```

> {:.info}
> > **Note:** Upstream targets' health information is exported once per subsystem. If both
> stream and HTTP listeners are enabled, targets' health will appear twice. Health metrics
> have a `subsystem` label to indicate which subsystem the metric refers to.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Moving this, it'll get lost and out of context behind this giant block.
